feat: fuse-overlayfs configuration (#2685)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/configuring-fuse.adoc

====

.Prerequisites

* The link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/{ocp4-ver}/installing/install_config/installing-customizing.html#installation-special-config-butane-install_installing-customizing[Butane] tool (`butane`) is installed in the operating system you are using.

* An active `{orch-cli}` session with administrative permissions to the destination OpenShift cluster. See {orch-cli-link}.

.Procedure

. Set an environment variable depending on whether your OpenShift cluster is a single node cluster, or a multi node cluster with separate control plane and worker nodes.
+
For a single node cluster, set:
[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ NODE_ROLE=master
----
For a multi node cluster, set:
[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ NODE_ROLE=worker
----

. Create a `MachineConfig` resource that creates a drop-in CRI-O configuration file named `99-podman-fuse` in the `NODE_ROLE` nodes. This configuration file allows access to the `/dev/fuse` device for certain pods.
+
[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
cat << EOF | butane | oc apply -f -
variant: openshift

> version: 4.12.0

Reviewer: Is it OpenShift version?

Author: This is the OpenShift butane config version: https://coreos.github.io/butane/upgrading-openshift/

Since version 4.12.0 is compatible with 4.13.0 and 4.14.0, I kept the version to 4.12.0

Author: For OpenShift >= 4.15, we do not need the MachineConfig to enable fuse overlay. I plan to provide a new PR to update the docs and merge it when OpenShift 4.15 is available

metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: ${NODE_ROLE}
  name: 99-podman-dev-fuse-${NODE_ROLE}
storage:
  files:
  - path: /etc/crio/crio.conf.d/99-podman-fuse <1>
    mode: 0644
    overwrite: true
    contents: <2>
      inline: |
        [crio.runtime.workloads.podman-fuse] <3>
        activation_annotation = "io.openshift.podman-fuse" <4>
        allowed_annotations = [
          "io.kubernetes.cri-o.Devices" <5>
        ]
        [crio.runtime]
        allowed_devices = ["/dev/fuse"] <6>
EOF
----
<1> The absolute file path to the new drop-in configuration file for CRI-O.
<2> The content of the new drop-in configuration file.
<3> Define a `podman-fuse` workload.
<4> The pod annotation that activates the `podman-fuse` workload settings.
<5> List of annotations the `podman-fuse` workload is allowed to process.
<6> List of devices on the host that a user can specify with the `io.kubernetes.cri-o.Devices` annotation.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

. After applying the `MachineConfig` resource, scheduling will be temporarily disabled for each node with the `worker` role as changes are applied. View the nodes' statuses.

> +

Author: I'm having trouble with the indentation for this section, as the numbering for the next step resets to 1 (red circle):
![Screenshot from 2024-02-15 10-43-23-edit](https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-docs/assets/83611742/d8892c39-bd35-46db-ae6f-5c7a6f55d4bb)

Any ideas on how I can fix it @deerskindoll ?

Reviewer 2: let's see how the formatting looks with added `+` in the empty lines

Author: I've applied the changes, however it is still having issues:
![Screenshot from 2024-02-16 11-21-23](https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-docs/assets/83611742/db083bb9-477d-4f29-a62a-13078a49253d)

Reviewer 2: got it, I'll look into it

[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ oc get nodes
----
Example output:
[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
NAME                           STATUS                     ROLES    AGE   VERSION
ip-10-0-136-161.ec2.internal   Ready                      worker   28m   v1.27.9
ip-10-0-136-243.ec2.internal   Ready                      master   34m   v1.27.9
ip-10-0-141-105.ec2.internal   Ready,SchedulingDisabled   worker   28m   v1.27.9
ip-10-0-142-249.ec2.internal   Ready                      master   34m   v1.27.9
ip-10-0-153-11.ec2.internal    Ready                      worker   28m   v1.27.9
ip-10-0-153-150.ec2.internal   Ready                      master   34m   v1.27.9
----

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
:description: Configuring fuse-overlayfs
:keywords: administration-guide, configuring, fuse
:navtitle: Configuring fuse-overlayfs
:page-aliases:

[id="configuring-fuse-overlayfs"]
= Configuring fuse-overlayfs

> By default, the Universal Developer Image (UDI) contains Podman which can be used to build and push container images within a workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the Universal Developer Image (UDI) contains Podman which you can use to build and push container images within a workspace.
```

However, Podman in the UDI is configured to use the `vfs` storage driver which does not provide copy-on-write support.

> For more efficient image management, it is recommended to use the fuse-overlayfs storage driver which supports copy-on-write in rootless environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more efficient image management, use the fuse-overlayfs storage driver which supports copy-on-write in rootless environments.
```

> This page describes how to make `/dev/fuse` be accessible to workspace containers, which is a requirement for using fuse-overlayfs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

== Enabling container access to /dev/fuse for OpenShift

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

To use fuse-overlayfs, you must make `/dev/fuse` accessible to workspace containers first.

```

[WARNING]
====

> Creating `MachineConfig` resources on an OpenShift cluster is a potentially dangerous task, as it allows making advanced, system-level changes to the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Creating `MachineConfig` resources on an OpenShift cluster is a potentially dangerous task, as you are making advanced, system-level changes to the cluster.
```

View the link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/{ocp4-ver}/post_installation_configuration/machine-configuration-tasks.html#machine-config-overview-post-install-machine-configuration-tasks[MachineConfig documentation] for more details and possible risks.

====

.Prerequisites

* The link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/{ocp4-ver}/installing/install_config/installing-customizing.html#installation-special-config-butane-install_installing-customizing[Butane] tool (`butane`) is installed in the operating system you are using.

* An active `{orch-cli}` session with administrative permissions to the destination OpenShift cluster. See {orch-cli-link}.

.Procedure

> . Set an environment variable depending on whether your OpenShift cluster is a single node cluster, or a multi node cluster with separate control plane and worker nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set the environment variable based on the type of your OpenShift cluster: a single node cluster, or a multi node cluster with separate control plane and worker nodes.
```

+

> For a single node cluster, set:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For a single node cluster, set:
```

[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ NODE_ROLE=master
----

> For a multi node cluster, set:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For a multi node cluster, set:
```

[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ NODE_ROLE=worker
----

> . Set an environment variable for the OpenShift Butane config version. This version is the major and minor of the OpenShift cluster. For example, `4.12.0`, `4.13.0`, or `4.14.0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set the environment variable for the OpenShift Butane config version. This variable is the major and minor version of the OpenShift cluster. For example, `4.12.0`, `4.13.0`, or `4.14.0`.
```

+
[subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
$ VERSION=4.12.0
----

> . Create a `MachineConfig` resource that creates a drop-in CRI-O configuration file named `99-podman-fuse` in the `NODE_ROLE` nodes. This configuration file allows access to the `/dev/fuse` device for certain pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a `MachineConfig` resource that creates a drop-in CRI-O configuration file named `99-podman-fuse` in the `NODE_ROLE` nodes. This configuration file makes access to the `/dev/fuse` device possible for certain pods.
```
